Setting up a CentOS 7 Server

After you have installed your server, you will go through the CentOS configuration process.
During this process you will be able to do the following:
  - Create users
  - Set a root password
  - Select the packages for your linux server
  - Setup networking
  - Create drive partitions
  - and more..

Create User
  - during this set it is vitally important to NEVER set the user as an administrator. This is a major security risk!!
  - always require passwords for users to log into your server. Not adding this requirement creates a major security risk!!
  - write down your password and store it in a safe place. Forgetting your password makes your life miserable!!
  


Update the server:
yum check-update (Any applications which need to be updated)
yum upgrade      (We don't need to keep obsolete packages; upgrade over update at this stage)
yum clean all    (Let's clean up any downloaded packages we don't need)

Basic Tools for Server Management:
yum install nano wget curl net-tools lsof

nano: This editor is better than Vi (fight me, nerd!)
wget: Get something from a web server
curl: Allows for data xfer using different protocols
net-tools: This helps management network environment
lsof: List open files (Does that file need to be open?)

Networking: Take a ride on the internetz and interwebz

There are two ways in which you can setup networking - GUI or CLI (command line interface)

GUI - This is a great way for beginners to setup a new server

nmtui-hostname: What do you want to call your host (server) mytestserver.nerdsrule.com (this is the FQDN (fully qualified domain name) for your server)
nmtui-edit: This will allow you to choose the network interface you want to setup -
              - the profile name of your nic card,
              - the device name,
              - the IP/Gateway/DNS Server
              - custom routes
nmtui-connect: Make sure that you actually enable the nic card


Time to test if your now able to see the interwebz

ifconfig <device name> or just ipconfig (NOTE: this is the OLD way)
ip addr show  (NOTE: This is the NEW way, use this, you'll impress people)

ip a (NOTE: this command is similar to the previous commands)
ping -c2 google.com (This will send a small packet of data to a server and then tell you how long it took to get there and back)

OLD WAY:
netstat -r : This will give you the routing table for your server
netstat -a : Hey what ports have you left open, are you sure those should be open?   (NOTE: This will return a lot of ports, you the ''| more' to only show 1 page at a time netstat -a | more )
netstat -tulpn : What PID/Program names are on these open ports? VERY USEFUL command

NEW WAY:

ip route
ss : What ports do you have open
Ip


The FUN STUFF

Managing Service on your CentOS Server

systemctl list-units : Let's find out what services are there and their current state (active / inactive)
systemctl list-unit-files -t service : Has a service been set to automatically start at boot up?

Remove unwanted services
systemctl stop <service name>
systemctl disable <service name>
yum remove <service name>

PS, TOP, or PSTree can be used to view services on your server
ps -aux | more : this is a common way to run this command
top : this will give us some additional data on server health and services running
pstree -p : (NOTE: this is not installed out of the box yum install psmisc)


FIREWALL!! YOU SHALL NOT PASS!!

Firewalling has a lot of complexity and as such configuring the firewall is outside of the scope of basic setup
ystemctl enable firewalld
systemctl start firewalld
systemctl status firewalld

SUDO Permissions on User Accounts

adduser michelle            : let's add a new user
passwd michelle             : give that new user a password
usermod -aG wheel michelle  : add the user to the SUDO group

NOW the GOOD STUFF!!

Let's setup our server as a LAMP box (Linux Apache2 MySQL PHP)
NOTE: You can use the free version of NGINX over Apache2.
sudo yum install httpd              : get the web server
sudo systemctl start httpd.service  : start the web server

http://your_server_IP_address/      : check to see if it's up and running
sudo systemctl enable httpd.service : Make Apache2 start at boot

If you're unsure about your public IP address
ip addr show eth0 | grep inet | awk '{ print $2; }' | sed 's/\/.*$//'  : Your friends will be impressed at your piping skills - get the ipv4 and ipv6 address for the device eth0, print the ipv4 on a line and then ipv6 on the next line
curl http://icanhazip.com   : use that fancy curl command and have icanhazip return your world ip address

Let's get the database installed

If you use YUM to install the database you'll actually get MariaDB. To install MySQL it's a little different.

wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql57-community-release-el7-9.noarch.rpm   : Download the file
md5sum mysql57-community-release-el7-9.noarch.rpm                           : Checksum to make sure you got the correct file

sudo rpm -ivh mysql57-community-release-el7-9.noarch.rpm    : extract your file and add the yum repositories
sudo yum install mysql-server

sudo systemctl start mysqld   : Turn on your sweet new MySQL server
sudo systemctl status mysqld  : Make sure that your server started up
sudo systemctl disable mysqld : MySQL is setup to auto start at bootup, but you can change that if you like.

sudo grep 'temporary password' /var/log/mysqld.log  : During the installation process, a temporary password is generated for the MySQL root user. This will show you.
sudo mysql_secure_installation : MySQL comes with a security script which will assist you in setting up a new password for root.

mysqladmin -u root -p version  : Verify everything you've done so far for your new SQL server

Install some PHP cuz webz are cool!

sudo yum install php php-mysql
yum search php-  : More PHP packages that you may want/need



Make sure your FIREWALL allows traffic to pass through to your web server
sudo firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=http
sudo firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=public --add-service=https
sudo firewall-cmd --reload
